Add explanation for subgroup vs dynamically uniform. (#2118)
KhronosGroup/Vulkan-Docs: chapters/shaders.adoc

Only <<limits-subgroup-supportedStages, shader stages that support subgroup
operations>> have defined subgroups.

[NOTE]
.Note
====

> In shaders, there are two kinds of uniformity that is of interest to
> applications, subgroup uniform and dynamically uniform.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In shaders, there are two kinds of uniformity that are of interest to
applications: subgroup uniform and dynamically uniform.
```

Reviewer 2: Are there other types that are *not* of interest to apps?

> While dynamically uniform appears to imply subgroup uniform,

Reviewer 3: nit: "appears to" reads as if the spec implies this. Maybe something like: "A common assumption is that dynamically uniform implies .." or "One could easily make the assumption that..".

Author: Reworded.

> While dynamically uniform appears to be a stronger kind of uniform
> than subgroups, it is not necessarily the case for graphics pipelines.

Reviewer: We have graphics stages with workgroups (TS, MS, tessellation stuff), and non-graphics stages without workgroups (RT)

```suggestion
While dynamically uniform appears to be a stronger kind of uniform
than subgroups, it is not necessarily the case for shader stages without defined workgroups.
```

Reviewer 2: "stronger" seems poorly defined in this context - is there a more specific meaning? It sounds like "better".

Reviewer: > "stronger" seems poorly defined in this context - is there a more specific meaning? It sounds like "better".

"Stronger" here appears to mean "implies", so perhaps something along the lines of "While dynamically uniform appears to imply subgroup uniform" would be better?

Reviewer 2: I was still hoping to improve the "stronger" term - something like @nanokatze suggests would be better.

> For shader stages with defined workgroups, this assumption holds.

Reviewer 3: nit: "this assumption" -> I understand what this refers to, but there's strictly speaking no "assumption" stated above. (My suggestion above would make the assumption explicit.)

Author: Reworded.

If a value is dynamically uniform, it is by definition also uniform across the subgroup,
as this is a specific guarantee provided to stages with explicit workgroups.
This is important if writing code like:

[source,c]
~~~~
uniform texture2D Textures[];
uint dynamicallyUniformValue = gl_WorkGroupID.x;
vec4 value = texelFetch(Textures[dynamicallyUniformValue], coord, 0);

// subgroupUniformValue is guaranteed to be uniform across the subgroup.
// This value also happens to be dynamically uniform.
vec4 subgroupUniformValue = subgroupBroadcastFirst(dynamicallyUniformValue);
~~~~

> In fragment shaders and other graphics stages, this gets complicated.

Reviewer: Other graphics stages is once again not correct. I'm not sure what a precise and good wording would be. Perhaps enumerate all stages? This should also include RT

Author: Reworded.

Due to scoping rules, there is no guarantee that a subgroup is a subset of the invocation scope,
which in turn defines the scope for dynamically uniform.

> In graphics, the invocation scope is a single draw command.

Reviewer 3: "single draw." ?
(The sentence below is somewhat contradictory otherwise sine vkCmdDrawIndexedIndirect (with drawCount > 1) is technically also a single draw _command_.)

In multi-draw indirect, there are multiple invocation scopes, one per code:DrawIndex.

[source,c]
~~~~
// Assume SubgroupSize = 8, where 3 draws are packed together.
// Two subgroups were generated.
uniform texture2D Textures[];

// DrawIndex builtin is dynamically uniform
uint dynamicallyUniformValue = gl_DrawID;
//              | gl_DrawID = 0 | gl_DrawID = 1 | }
// Subgroup 0: { 0, 0, 0, 0,      1, 1, 1, 1 }
//              | DrawID = 2 | DrawID = 1 | }
// Subgroup 1: { 2, 2, 2, 2,      1, 1, 1, 1 }

> uint notActuallyDynamicallyUniformAnymore =

Author: > t's concerning because this part suggests that you can't use a peeling loop to remove the need for the nonuniform decoration, which I think existing content relies on.

Peeling loops to avoid nonuniformEXT are technically out of spec, since dynamically uniform is the requirement, not subgroup uniform.

Only <<limits-subgroup-supportedStages, shader stages that support subgroup
operations>> have defined subgroups.

[NOTE]
.Note
====
In shaders, there are two kinds of uniformity that are of primary interest to

> applications:, subgroup uniform and dynamically uniform.

Reviewer 4: Whoops, edit: we _do_ still use dynamically uniform, but not subgroup uniform.  We also say "dynamically uniform within a <SCOPE> scope instance", so my point mostly still stands, with some caveats 😅.

> applications:, subgroup uniform and dynamically uniform.

Author: Fixed.

vec4 value = texelFetch(Textures[notActuallyDynamicallyUniformAnymore],
                        coord, 0);
~~~~

Another problematic scenario is when a shader attempts to help the compiler notice
that a value is subgroup uniform to potentially improve performance.

[source,c]
~~~~
layout(location = 0) flat in dynamicallyUniformIndex;
// Vertex shader might have emitted a value that depends only on gl_DrawID,
// making it dynamically uniform.
// Give knowledge to compiler that the flat input is dynamically uniform,
// as this is not a guarantee otherwise.

uint uniformIndex = subgroupBroadcastFirst(dynamicallyUniformIndex);
// Hazard: If different draw commands are packed into one subgroup, the uniformIndex is wrong.

DrawData d = UBO.perDrawData[uniformIndex];
~~~~

For implementations where subgroups are packed across draws, the implementation must
make sure to handle descriptor indexing correctly. From the specification's point of view,
a dynamically uniform index does not require code:NonUniform decoration,
and such an implementation will likely either promote descriptor indexing into code:NonUniform on its own,

> or handle non-uniformity natively.

Reviewer 5: This point makes a lot of senses to me, however I am hassled between using the word "natively" and "implicitly". In this specific case the implementation will be expected to handle this "implicit" non-uniformity correctly by itself without an "explicit" NonUnifom decoration on the dynamically uniform index. It seems to me that it saying the implementation will be responsible to make the judgement for individual situations before taking the actions correspondingly, but not natively for all the general cases. I may go for a "implicitly" as a nitpicker.

> or handle non-uniformity natively.

Reviewer 5: This point makes a lot of senses to me, however I am hassled between using the word "natively" and "implicitly". In this specific case the implementation will be expected to handle this "implicit" non-uniformity correctly by itself without an "explicit" NonUnifom decoration on the dynamically uniform index. It seems to me that it saying the implementation will be responsible to make the judgement for individual situations before taking the actions correspondingly, but not natively for all the general cases. I may go for a "implicitly" as a nitpicker.

Reviewer 5: Ah, I was meant to click the review with comment.

Author: Reworded to "implicitly" rather than "native".
